on windswept expanse of barren land pot
marked by prairie dog burrows in
southern Colorado a team of wildlife
biologists and volunteers scour the area
inspecting each burrow to find the right
ones
the burrows they see are for the
priceless cargo that members of the team
carry in small kennels from inside the
kennels pier the shining eyes and masked
faces of the most endangered mammals in
North America black footed ferrets these
young ferrets are on the final leg of a
long journey that began with a
remarkable discovery thirty years ago
in 1979 after a long and devastating
decline in their numbers due to habitat
loss and disease the last known black
footed ferret died in captivity at that
time the only ferret species native to
North America was believed to be extinct
then in 1981 came a remarkable discovery
a population of 129 black footed ferrets
was discovered on a private ranch in
Wyoming unfortunately a deadly plague
was spreading through the colony and
killing the ferrets with black footed
ferrets again teetering on the brink of
extinction federal wildlife biologists
decided to rescue the remaining 18
ferrets from the wild since then the
future of the black-footed ferret has
relied upon an extensive captive
breeding and reintroduction program run
by the US Fish and Wildlife Service
today the hub of the far-reaching
program is located at the black-footed
ferret Conservation Center near
Willington Colorado a breeding
population of ferrets is housed in large
sunny rooms under tightly controlled
conditions the males and females are
housed in separate cages until the time
is right for breeding the conservation
center produces the greatest number of
young ferrets for reintroduction but
other breeding facilities also
participate in the program one of the
earliest black footed ferret breeding
facilities is located at the Cheyenne
Mountain Zoo in Colorado Springs
the ferrets live in strict isolation in
a special building located away from the
rest of the zoo while here the ferrets
undergo cage enrichment exercises where
they are given empty paper bags to help
establish their predatory skills when
mature they're moved from the zoo to the
Conservation Center in Wellington for
the final stage of preconditioning
before being released into the wild
during preconditioning the ferrets live
in special outdoor enclosures that
simulate life in actual prairie dog
burrows from inside the enclosures they
can hear and see wild prairie dogs
moving about on surrounding prairie here
they remain protected from predators
while gaining experience in killing live
prairie dogs all black footed ferrets
must experience live kills before they
can be released
prairie dogs make up over 90% of a
ferrets diet and healthy populations
play a critical role in the survival of
wild ferrets
when the ferrets have completed their
preconditioning at the conservation
center they're ready for release these
ferrets are about to be set free on
Walker ranch near puebla they are the
first endangered species to be released
in colorado in many years thanks to the
combined efforts of Colorado Parks and
Wildlife and the Colorado Cattlemen's
Association legislation was passed in
allowing Colorado Parks and Wildlife to
participate in the reintroduction of
black footed ferrets in Colorado
if the releases take place on private
lands enrolled in safe harbor agreements
landowners enrolled in safe harbor
agreements are not held responsible
should something catastrophic happen -
the ferrets monitoring the ferrets is an
ongoing effort shared by Colorado Parks
and Wildlife and the US Fish and
Wildlife Service periodically
researchers from each agency will gather
at Walker Ranch to check on the ferrets
two-person crews use GPS tracking to
guide them on prescribed routes around
the release areas at night powerful
spotlights probe the darkness sweeping
the landscape and illuminating prairie
dog burrows in search of the elusive
ference black footed ferrets are
nocturnal spending the majority of the
day below ground in vacant prairie dog
burrows they venture out at night under
the cover of darkness
going from borough to borough searching
for prairie dogs
the ferrets now roam free survival is up
to them from now on the biologists and
researchers can only monitor the
ferret's and hope that the
reintroduction efforts and the ferrets
natural instincts will ensure the future
of North America's most endangered
mammal